---
date: 2023-06-13T12:56:10-04:00
title: "new publication: far-right and anti-feminist influences on a Mormon Twitter hashtag"
tags: ["macro","Work","online Mormonism","publications","research","Amy Chapman","DezNat","Mormonism","Mormon Studies","Mormon Twitter"]
---
I am very happy to announce that a paper I wrote with Amy Chapman is finally published and [available open access](https://jmssa.org/greenhalgh/) in the *Journal of the Mormon Social Science Association* (I have also archived a PDF of the article on my website, available at [this link](https://spencergreenhalgh.com/Greenhalgh_Chapman_2023_DezNat.pdf)). Amy and I began this project in the spring/summer of 2019, so it's a relief to finally see our first paper in print. 

In short, the paper is a descriptive look at tweets using the #DezNat hashtag; DezNat, short for either Deseret Nation or Deseret Nationalism (depending on who you ask) is a movement of arch-conservative Mormons on Twitter and elsewhere on the internet. As an internet researcher with a deep familiarity with Mormonism, I felt like this was perfect research for me to tackle (something I've [written about](https://spencergreenhalgh.com/work/when-niche-research-pays-off/) before). We qualitatively coded 1,378 screenshots of tweets (part of the reason that this took so long to get to print), and wound up with a wealth of data and findings. This first paper is focused on *red pill* (i.e., far-right and anti-feminist) influences in the hashtag, making a scholarly contribution to some of the popular and media discussions about the DezNat movement. Here's the abstract for the paper: 

> Scholarship on the intersection of Mormonism and the internet has often focused on progressive online voices. However, in recent years, the DezNat movement has challenged the assumption that online Mormonism necessarily trends more liberal than the Latter-day Saint mainstream. In this study, we examine the influence of *red pill* communities—which include far-right and anti-feminist movements on the internet—on DezNat. We collected 1,378 screenshots of tweets containing the #DezNat hashtag (which often included additional data and context) and engaged in open coding of these tweets, guided by our understanding of *red pill* concepts and tropes. We found considerable evidence of far-right and anti-feminist influences on DezNat-tagged tweets, suggesting that it is disingenuous for DezNat defenders to describe the movement as merely about Latter-day Saint orthodoxy. However, interpreting our findings through an *affinity space* framework, we argue that it is impractical—and perhaps impossible—to definitively establish the motivations of all those who participate in the movement. Rather, we suggest that the clear *red pill* references by DezNat participants provide an opportunity to consider overlaps between Mormonism, the far right, and aggressive anti-feminism—as well as the tensions between intentional ambiguity and boundary maintenance in Latter-day Saint institutions.

This paper represents about half of our analysis, and we are slowly but surely working on a second paper that will examine conceptions of religious authority in the DezNat movement. This is the less obvious story of the two (as it hasn't come up as much in popular discourse around DezNat), but I think it might be the more interesting. I'm looking forward to getting it ready for publication!