---
date: 2024-01-29T19:21:31-05:00
title: "📚 bookblog: ❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️ for Curveball: When Your Faith Takes Turns You Never Saw Coming, by Peter Enns"
tags: ["media","book","Communities","Curveball","Peter Enns","faith crisis","faith transition","existential","non-theism","Paul Tillich"]
---

I owe Pete Enns a lot. Reading his books in the years before I hit a faith crisis helped that experience go **a lot** more smoothly, as did continuing to read his stuff and listen to his podcasts during the process of faith transition. 

Around the time this book was coming out, though, I needed a break. I felt like I knew most of his stuff, his media efforts felt like they were getting bigger and more corporate, and as much as I owed him, I wasn't feeling it anymore. I even wondered what I could possibly get from another book and avoided this one for a while.

In a recent book lull, I saw that the audiobook was short and decided to give it a try. This might now be my favorite of his books—or at least, this is the one that speaks to me where I am now. It picks up on Tillich's ideas in a more accessible way, it speaks to non-literalism and existential anxiety in a way that I need, and it does a good job of speaking to the way I see Christianity today. He *almost* lost me in the chapter talking about near-death experiences, but he wasn't doing it in a weird "heaven is real" kind of way so much as insisting that we have a lot we don't know about this weird universe we live in. I guess I can get behind that.

Anyway, I liked this enough that I'm planning to get a print copy of my own sometime soon, though I'll note that his recording his own audiobook (after years of podcasting experience) is a nice touch.