---
types: ["media"]
layout: book
date: 2026-04-22T09:47:01-04:00
title: "📚 bookblog: Exploring Community of Christ Basic Beliefs: A Commentary  (❤️❤️❤️🖤🖤)"
tags: ["Exploring Community of Christ Basic Beliefs: A Commentary","Tony Chvala-Smith","Community of Christ","",""]
media: ["book",""]
titles: ["Exploring Community of Christ Basic Beliefs: A Commentary"]
creators: ["Tony Chvala-Smith"]
series: [""]
franchise: [""]
ratings: ["❤️❤️❤️🖤🖤"]
params:
  entry: 
---

Like the last Tony-authored book I reviewed, I want to concede that there's a bit of unfairness coming into my review. In some ways, I think it's an important work that just isn't what I'm looking for right now. What's more, it's kind of a reference work that I tried to read cover to cover, and that affects my thinking, too. However, I also have some grumps about it that I think are valid.

I think a shorter, tighter version of this project would have been more helpful, for one. There's lots of good information here, but trimming down to the most important stuff might have made for a more accessible read. 

I also have questions about the journey this volume took (this is the third version of it that I've read, and all of them hint at a mysterious behind the scenes process). I get the impression that it started off as more of a clearly multi-authored work, and I think I might have appreciated that more. While the single voice that comes through this final version is interesting, it also sometimes feels repetitive, with certain key scriptural and theological references repeated at multiple points. I'm not interested in hearing crazy takes on Community of Christ Basic Beliefs (I can get those on Sunday if I want them), but especially since we're not a dogmatic denomination (as the volume helpfully points out), I'd love to hear different voices all within the range of responsible representations of denominational beliefs.

I'm glad I own it, I'm glad I read it, and I expect I'll consult it for a project I'm working on (which is why I read it now anyway), but I feel like it could have been a better (perhaps more multivoiced and more concise) volume than what it is. Or maybe it's just not what I needed at this point of my theological self-education.