---
types: ["tea"]
layout: tea
date: 2025-12-01T08:30:46-05:00
title: "☕ teablog: Whittard, Christmas Tea  (❤️❤️❤️❤️🖤)"
tags: ["black tea","Whittard Tea Advent Calendar","Whittard","Christmas Tea"]
titles: ["Whittard"]
brands: ["Whittard"]
blends: ["Christmas Tea"]
tea_types: ["black"]
tea_ratings: ["❤️❤️❤️❤️🖤"]
---

Okay, I've been thinking about setting up a "teablog" for a while, but this Advent, my sister-in-law are working our way through the same Whittard Tea Advent Calendar, so it's time to actually set this up. My hope is that taking notes like this will get me to think harder about what I like (and don't) in teas.

This puts me in the weird position of suddenly reviewing teas I've been drinking for months (even years), but what are you going to do? There are also going to be a flood of posts in December as I work on that "backlog" and also make my way through this Advent Calendar, and things might get less exciting in January, but I believe firmly in blogging for myself first, and this is what makes sense for me.

Okay, now this morning's tea thoughts: This Christmas tea is good but not "knock your socks off" good. I don't love it when a tea smells one way and then tastes another. This smells very Christmassy, showing off the "flavors of spice and citrus" that are listed. However, past one or two sips, those flavors kind of disappear, and a more "breakfasty" flavor starts to come through. I don't mind a breakfast tea, so it's not bad, but it's also not what was advertised, so it's a little bit of a disappointment.

I'd drink this again, but I don't know that I'd buy a whole tin or box. It's not quite what it claims to be even if it's still enjoyable after the "Christmas" flavor disappears.

Writing this out makes me wonder if I'm being too kind with my rating, but whatever. I tend to be overly kind with my ratings in general, and it's not as if I was "meh" about the tea—just disappointed that it didn't taste more like it smelled.