---
type: ["macro"]
date: 2022-09-06T15:17:44-04:00
title: "Wil Wheaton on general purpose computing"
tags: ["Wil Wheaton","Still Just a Geek","DRM","general purpose computing","EFF","Little Brother series","Cory Doctorow","iPad","Apple","ClassDojo","computer science","computer science education","digital rights"]
---
I am very near the end of Wil Wheaton's updated/annotated memoir *Still Just a Geek*, which I bought over the summer on a short family trip. I have lots of thoughts—most of them positive—about the memoir and may write a bit more about it once I finally finish. For now, though, since I wrote last week complaining about companies like [Apple](https://spencergreenhalgh.com/myself/apple-and-artificial-restrictions-on-file-syncing/) and [ClassDojo](https://spencergreenhalgh.com/work/classdojo-and-the-creation-of-artificial-demand/) restricting hardware and software to support their bottom line at the expense of users, I was struck by a short passage Wheaton included making a case for general purpose computing: 

> When I was ten or eleven, my parents bought our family a personal computer. It was an Atari 400. It connected to our television, used a membrane keyboard, and was outfitted with four kilobytes of RAM. As a simple point of comparison, the document I ended up with when I finished writing this talk was thirty-five kilobytes. Yes, a single word processing document was nearly *nine times* larger than the RAM that made our *entire* computer come to life. 
> 
> But the thing about that computer is it would do whatever I told it to do. It was limited only by its memory and how clever I was as a young programmer. There wasn't a marketing department locking down features so they could sell them to me as in-app purchases. There wasn't a deliberate crippling of the computer's inherent capabilities so the manufacturer could sell me additional features once I paid to have them unlocked. There wasn't even an Internet to connect to, so the manufacturer couldn't demand I connect to a server somewhere to authenticate some DRM scheme. 
> 
> In other words, we *owned* that computer, in every sense of the word, and whether I wanted to copy a game program out of a magazine, create my own from scratch, or even play a cartridge-based game like Pac-Man (which was *so* much better on the 400 than the 2600), it did what I wanted it to do. My imagination was the only thing that limited me, because in those days it was a real challenge for a ten-year-old to max out 4K of RAM.

Wheaton is really channeling Cory Doctorow here; in fact, he namechecks him elsewhere in the speech this is taken from, and I now get why Wheaton has a cameo appearance in Doctorow's *Homeland*. As I often do when I read Doctorow, I think we ought to acknowledge some practical limitations to this kind of boundless nostalgia for the past. I deeply respect Doctorow's argument for why he'll never use an iPad, but I think there's room for a computer like an iPad in a world where 88-year old grandmothers are using those computers. To get everyone to be able to use computers like Doctorow and Wheaton do, we need to give people a lot more experience and education using full-control, general purpose computers. I'm not opposed to that education, but as computer science education stands now, it's not about digital rights or user empowerment, it's about producing a pipeline of tech workers for tech giants.

All of those hedges aside, I think we need to hear more voices like Wheaton's and Doctorow's. I think we need to empower computer users so that they don't accept limited purpose computers. There's value in this optimism, and there's a lot of danger in not fighting for it everyday.
